Add custom attachment factory guide for XML (#3543)
GetStream/stream-chat-android: docusaurus/docs/Android/03-ui/06-guides/07-adding-custom-attachments.mdx

# Adding Custom Attachments

## Introduction

> By default Stream Chat supports several built-in attachment types like image, video, file and giphy. Apart from that, you can also add your own types of attachments such as location, contact, audio, sticker, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default Stream Chat supports several built-in attachment types like image, video, file and giphy. You can also add your own types of attachments such as location, contact, audio, sticker, etc.
```

:::note
In this guide, we'll show only the main points concerning custom attachments. Smaller parts will be omitted for the sake of being concise.

You can find the full code from this guide on [GitHub](https://github.com/GetStream/Android-Samples/tree/main/custom-attachments).
:::

## Sending Date Attachments

To begin with, you'll need to customize [MessageInputView](../04-message-components/04-message-input.mdx) so that the attachment button allows the user to pick dates:

```kotlin
messageInputView.setAttachmentButtonClickListener { 
    val dialogPickerDialog = MaterialDatePicker.Builder
        .datePicker()
        .build()

    dialogPickerDialog.addOnPositiveButtonClickListener {
        val date = DateFormat
            .getDateInstance(DateFormat.LONG)
            .format(Date(it))
        val attachment = Attachment(
            type = "date",
            extraData = mutableMapOf("payload" to date)
        )
        messageInputView.submitCustomAttachments(
            attachments = listOf(attachment),
            viewHolderFactory = DateAttachmentPreviewFactory()
        )
    }

    dialogPickerDialog.show(requireActivity().supportFragmentManager, null)
}
```

> For simplicity, we are reusing the existing attachment button to show date picker dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep it simple we are reusing the existing attachment button to show the date picker dialog.
```

After the date has been selected, we create an instance of `Attachment` with the corresponding payload and submit it to the `MessageInputView`.

> Note that the `MessageInputView::submitCustomAttachments` method also requires a ViewHolder factory to provide support for displaying custom attachments previews in in the `MessageInputView`. Here's the code for this factory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the `MessageInputView::submitCustomAttachments` method also requires a ViewHolder factory to provide support for displaying custom attachment previews in in the `MessageInputView`. Here's the code for this factory:
```

        private val binding: ItemDateAttachmentPreviewBinding,
    ) : BaseSelectedCustomAttachmentViewHolder(binding.root) {

        override fun bind(attachment: Attachment, onAttachmentCancelled: (Attachment) -> Unit) {
            binding.dateTextView.text = attachment.extraData["payload"].toString()
            binding.deleteButton.setOnClickListener {
                onAttachmentCancelled(attachment)
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Now you can send a custom attachment of type `date` to the chat. The resulting UI will look like this:

![Sending Custom Attachment](../../assets/sending_custom_attachments.png)

Next, you'll need to build a custom attachment factory to render the item in the message list.

## Rendering Date Attachments

To render a custom attachment in the [MessageListView](../04-message-components/02-message-list.mdx) you'll have to implement `AttachmentFactory` interface:

```kotlin
interface AttachmentFactory {
    
    fun canHandle(message: Message): Boolean
    
    fun createViewHolder(
        message: Message,
        listeners: MessageListListenerContainer?,
        parent: ViewGroup,
    ): InnerAttachmentViewHolder
}
```

> There are two methods that needs to be implemented:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two methods that need to be implemented:
```

> * `canHandle`: Describes the condition that tells our components if the factory can handle a given set of attachments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `canHandle`: Checks whether the factory can handle the given attachments.
* ```

        private lateinit var message: Message

        init {
            binding.dateTextView.setOnClickListener {
                listeners?.attachmentClickListener?.onAttachmentClick(
                    message,
                    message.attachments.first()
                )
            }
            binding.dateTextView.setOnLongClickListener {
                listeners?.messageLongClickListener?.onMessageLongClick(message)
                true
            }
        }

        override fun onBindViewHolder(message: Message) {
            this.message = message

            binding.dateTextView.text = message.attachments
                .first { it.type == "date" }
                .extraData["payload"]
                .toString()
        }
    }
}
```

What's important here is how you're able to fetch the custom attachment data, using `attachment.extraData["payload"]`. You can format the data in any way you want here, which makes our attachments very powerful.

To complete the date sharing feature you just need to provide `DateAttachmentFactory` via `ChatUI`:

```kotlin
ChatUI.attachmentFactoryManager = AttachmentFactoryManager(listOf(DateAttachmentFactory()))
```

> Date attachments should be now correctly rendered in the message input and in the message list like on the screenshot below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Date attachments should now be correctly rendered in the message input and in the message list like on the screenshot below:
* ```
